Add release note content for SL Beta3 language changes (#924)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-release: release-notes/swan-lake-beta3-release-note.md

```ballerina
float a = 10 + 3.0 + 5.0;
float b = 5 / 10.2;
decimal c = 10.0 * 3;
decimal d = 10 + 5 - 3.0;
```

##### Isolated Inference

The compiler now infers `isolated` for service objects, class definitions, variables, and functions in scenarios where if all of them explicitly specified an `isolated` qualifier they would meet the requirements for isolated functions and isolated objects.

The following service and its methods are now inferred to be isolated.
```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
 
int defaultIncrement = 10;
 
service / on new http:Listener(8080) {
   private int value = 0;
 
   resource function get value() returns int {
       int value;
       lock {
           value = self.value;
       }
 
       lock {
           return value + defaultIncrement;
       }
   }
 
   resource function post increment(int i) {
       lock {
           self.value += i;
       }
   }
}
```

The compiler does not infer `isolated` for any constructs that are exposed outside the module.

> ###### Type Narrowing in the `where` Clause of a Query Expression/Action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Type Narrowing in the `where` Clause of a Query Expression/Action
```

```ballerina
error? x = ();
 
// Now allowed.
if x == () {
 
}
``` 

#### Bug Fixes

- In a stream type `stream<T, C>`; the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. A bug where this was not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

```ballerina
class StreamImplementor {
   public isolated function next() returns record {|int value;|}|error? {
       return;
   }
}
 
stream<int, error> stm = new (new StreamImplementor()); // Will now result in an error.
```

- Resource methods are no longer added to the type via object type inclusions. This was previously added even though resource methods do not affect typing.

```ballerina
service class Foo {
   resource function get f1() returns string {
       return "foo";
   }
 
   function f2() returns int => 42;
}
 
// It is no longer required to implement the `get f1` resource method.
service class Bar {
   *Foo;
 
   function f2() returns int => 36;
}
```

- A bug in string unescaping of unicode codepoints > `0xFFFF` has been fixed.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {

>   string str = "Hello word! \u{1F600}";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  string str = "Hello world! \u{1F600}";
```

  io:println(str);
}
```

> The above code snippet which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello word! 😀`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above code snippet which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello world! 😀`.
```

- A bug in escaping of NumericEscape has been fixed.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
  string str = "\\u{61}pple";
  io:println(str);
}
```

This code snippet which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.

> - A bug that resulted in NumericEscape in the template string not being interpreted literally has been fixed.

Author: ```suggestion
- A bug that resulted in NumericEscape in the template string not being interpreted literally has been fixed.

```

> ```ballerina

Reviewer: Missing newline above. To be aligned with other places. No difference in rendering though.

Author: Thanks, fixed this and the rest.

#### New Features

##### Introduction of the `!is` Operator

The `!is` operator has been introduced to check if a value does not belong to a given type. This is the negation of the `is` operator.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
   int|string? x = 10;
 
   if x !is () {
       io:println("int or string value: ", x);
   }
}
```

##### Inferring Types for Numeric Literals in Additive and Multiplicative Expressions

The type for numeric literals in additive and multiplicative expressions is now inferred from the contextually-expected type.

> When the contextually-expected type for an additive or multiplicative expression is `float`, the type of a literal used as a sub expression is inferred to be `float`. Similarly, if the contextually-expected type is `decimal` the type of the literal is inferred to be `decimal`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the contextually-expected type for an additive or multiplicative expression is `float`, the type of a literal used as a sub expression is inferred to be `float`. Similarly, if the contextually-expected type is `decimal`, the type of the literal is inferred to be `decimal`.
```

```ballerina
float a = 10 + 3.0 + 5.0;
float b = 5 / 10.2;
decimal c = 10.0 * 3;
decimal d = 10 + 5 - 3.0;
```

##### Isolated Inference

> The compiler now infers `isolated` for service objects, class definitions, variables, and functions in scenarios where if all of them explicitly specified an `isolated` qualifier they would meet the requirements for isolated functions and isolated objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The compiler now infers `isolated` for service objects, class definitions, variables, and functions in scenarios where if all of them explicitly specify an `isolated` qualifier, they would meet the requirements for isolated functions and isolated objects.
```

The following service and its methods are now inferred to be isolated.
```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
 
int defaultIncrement = 10;
 
service / on new http:Listener(8080) {
   private int value = 0;
 
   resource function get value() returns int {
       int value;
       lock {
           value = self.value;
       }
 
       lock {
           return value + defaultIncrement;
       }
   }
 
   resource function post increment(int i) {
       lock {
           self.value += i;
       }
   }
}
```

The compiler does not infer `isolated` for any constructs that are exposed outside the module.

##### Type Narrowing in the `where` Clause of a Query Expression/Action

> The `where` clause in a query now narrows types, similar to `if` statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `where` clause in a query now narrows the types similar to `if` statements.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() returns error? {
   int?[] v = [1, 2, (), 3];
   int total = 0;
   check from int? i in v
       where i is int
       do {
           // Type of `i` is narrowed to `int`.
           total += i;
       };
   io:println(total); // Prints 6.
}
```

#### Improvements

##### Enum Declarations with Duplicate Members

Enum declarations can have duplicate members.

> For example, the following declarations where both `LiftStatus` and `TrailStatus` have the same ‘OPEN’ and ‘CLOSED’ members is now allowed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the following declarations where both `LiftStatus` and `TrailStatus` have the same ‘OPEN’ and ‘CLOSED’ members are now allowed.
```

> For example, the following declarations where both `LiftStatus` and `TrailStatus` have the same ‘OPEN’ and ‘CLOSED’ members are now allowed.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, the following declarations where both `LiftStatus` and `TrailStatus` have the same `OPEN` and `CLOSED` members are now allowed.
```

```ballerina
enum LiftStatus {
   OPEN,
   CLOSED = "0",
   HOLD
}
 
enum TrailStatus {
   OPEN,
   CLOSED = "0"
}
```

> However, it is an error for the same enum declaration to have duplicate members. Similarly, it is also an error for different enums to initialize the same member with different values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is an error if the same enum declaration has duplicate members. Similarly, it is also an error if different enums initialize the same member with different values.
```

##### `string:Char` as the Static Type of String Member Access

The static type of the member access operation on a value of type `string` has been updated to be `string:Char` instead of `string`.

```ballerina
public function main() {
   string str = "text";
 
   // Can now be assigned to a variable of type `string:Char`.
   string:Char firstChar = str[0];
}
```

##### Directly Calling Function-typed Fields of an Object

> Fields of an object that are of a function type can now be directly called via an object value using method call syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fields of an object that are of a function type can now be directly called via an object value using the method call syntax.
```

```ballerina
class Engine {
   boolean started = false;
  
   function 'start() {
       self.started = true;
   }
}
 
class Car {
   Engine engine;
 
   function () 'start;
 
   function init() {
       self.engine = new;
       // Delegate `car.start` to `engine.start`.
       self.'start = self.engine.'start;
   }
}
 
public function main() {
   Car car = new;
   car.'start(); // Call the function via the object field.
}
```

##### Tuple to JSON Compatibility

A tuple value whose members are JSON compatible can now be used in a context that expects a JSON value.

```ballerina
[string, int, boolean...] a = ["text1", 1, true, false];
// Now allowed.
json b = a;
```

##### Error Return in the `init` Method of a Service Declaration

> Previously the `init` method of a service declaration could not have a return type containing error. With this release that restriction has been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, the `init` method of a service declaration could not have a return type containing an error. That restriction has been removed with this release.
```

If the expression used with `check` results in an error value, the `init` method will return the error resulting in either the `new` expression returning an error or the object constructor expression resulting in an error.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
int? value = ();
 
class NumberGenerator {
   int lowerLimit;
 
   // `check` can be used in the field initializer
   // since the `init` method's return type allows `error`.
   int upperLimit = check value.ensureType();
 
   function init(int lowerLimit) returns error? {
       self.lowerLimit = lowerLimit;
   }
}
 
public function main() {
   NumberGenerator|error x = new (0);
 
   if x is error {
       io:println(x);
   }
}
```

##### Wildcard Binding Pattern Support in Variable Declarations

The wildcard binding pattern can now be used in a variable declaration with a value that belongs to type `any`.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
float _ = 3.14;
var _ = io:println("hello");
```

Using the wildcard binding pattern when the value is an error will result in a compilation error.

```ballerina
var _ = error("custom error"); // Compilation error.
```

##### Relaxed Static Type Requirements for `==` and `!=`

> Previously `==` and `!=` were allowed only when both operands were of static types that are subtypes of `anydata`. This has now been relaxed to allow `==` and `!=` if the static type of at least one operand is a subtype of `anydata`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, `==` and `!=` were allowed only when both operands were of static types that are subtypes of `anydata`. This has now been relaxed to allow `==` and `!=` if the static type of at least one operand is a subtype of `anydata`.
```

}
``` 

#### Bug Fixes

- In a stream type `stream<T, C>`; the completion type `C` should always include nil if it is a bounded stream. A bug where this was not validated for stream implementors has been fixed.

```ballerina
class StreamImplementor {
   public isolated function next() returns record {|int value;|}|error? {
       return;
   }
}
 
stream<int, error> stm = new (new StreamImplementor()); // Will now result in an error.
```

- Resource methods are no longer added to the type via object type inclusions. This was previously added even though resource methods do not affect typing.

```ballerina
service class Foo {
   resource function get f1() returns string {
       return "foo";
   }
 
   function f2() returns int => 42;
}
 
// It is no longer required to implement the `get f1` resource method.
service class Bar {
   *Foo;
 
   function f2() returns int => 36;
}
```

- A bug in string unescaping of unicode codepoints > `0xFFFF` has been fixed.

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
  string str = "Hello world! \u{1F600}";
  io:println(str);
}
```

The above code snippet which previously printed `Hello world!  ὠ0` will now print `Hello world! 😀`.

> - A bug in escaping of NumericEscape has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A bug in escaping the `NumericEscape` has been fixed.
```

Author: Since we are emphasizing isn't it enough to say
```suggestion
- A bug in escaping `NumericEscape` has been fixed.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
  string str = "\\u{61}pple";
  io:println(str);
}
```

> This code snippet which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code snippet,m which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.
```

Author: Typo with m?

Will change to
```suggestion
This code snippet, which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.
```

> - A bug that resulted in NumericEscape in the template string not being interpreted literally has been fixed.

Author: ```suggestion
- A bug that resulted in `NumericEscape` in the template string not being interpreted literally has been fixed.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
 
public function main() {
  string str = string `\u{61}pple`;
  io:println(str);
}
```

> The code snippet above which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The code snippet above, which previously printed `\u0061pple` will now print `\u{61}pple`.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: - A bug that resulted in self-referencing not being detected when referenced via a `let expression` or a `constant reference expression` has been fixed. 
```ballerina
const int CONST1 = CONST1; // Compilation error
public function main() {
    string s = let string[] ar = [s] in ar[0]; // Compilation error
}
```

Reviewer 3: @rdhananjaya can you please check this?

Reviewer 4: +1

Author: How about

````suggestion

- A bug that resulted in self-referencing not being detected when referenced via a `let` expression or a constant reference expression has been fixed.

The following will now result in errors.

```ballerina
const int INTEGER = INTEGER; // Compilation error.

public function main() {
    string s = let string[] arr = [s] in arr[0]; // Compilation error.
}
```
````

Reviewer 3: +1

#### Bug Fixes

- The completion type of a stream is now considered in runtime assignability checks.

```ballerina
stream<int, error?> stm = new (new StreamImplementor());
 
// Evaluated to true in SL Beta2, evaluates to false now.
boolean streamCheck = stm is stream<int>;
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
